Zuul can be used to ensure that every commit
merged into a project has passed tests
and the project continues to work
with its dependencies.
When a change or pull request is approved
Zuul adds it to the gate pipeline.
This pipeline holds changes to be merged
into their respective projects
in the order in which they are going to merge.
This ordering can be determined explicitly
if a user adds a "Depends-On" line
to the commit message.
In that case, Zuul will make sure that the
dependency is enqueued first
followed by the change that depends on it.
Or as in this case the order might simply be
determined by the order
in which changes are approved
by the project's developers.
In the example shown here
developers have approved
two changes to Nova,
one change to Keystone,
followed by one more change to Nova.
As soon as a change is enqueued
into the gate pipeline
Zuul starts running jobs for that change.
Each item in the pipeline represents
a future state of its project
but also includes the future state
of all the projects ahead of it in the queue.
So in this case, the tests which are running
on the second Nova change
include the commit for that change
as well as the first.
Nova and Keystone are tested together
in the integration test job
so when that job runs on change #3
it is testing not only the Keystone change
but both Nova changes as well.
Inside that test job,
it is as if all the changes ahead of it
in the queue have already merged.
In this way, Zuul tests the changes as they
would be merged into the git repository
not simply as they were written.
Zuul runs all of these tests in parallel
but as soon as a job fails,
the future that Zuul predicted
is no longer valid --
we know that change is not going to merge.
All of the tests for changes behind it
in the queue are outdated
so Zuul cancels any running jobs
for those changes.
Here we can see that not only has
change #4 failed
but change #3 has as well.
Because #3 failed and is no longer
eligible to merge
Zuul has invalidated the earlier
test results for #4
and has re-started jobs for #4 with only
changes #1 and #2 included this time.
Change #3 stays in the queue in case
one of the changes ahead of it fails
but unless that happens it will not be merged.
As changes #1 and #2 complete their tests
each of them is merged into
the Nova repository.
Once that is complete
it is safe to report the Keystone change #3
as having failed its tests
Finally, the tests for Nova
change #4 are passing now
confirming that the earlier problem
was due to the Keystone change
Zuul merges the final Nova
change into the repository
once all tests are complete.